NIP-17 (old 24) Sealed Gift-Wrapped Messages for Private DMs and Small Group Chats (#686)
nostr-protocol/nips: 17.md

{
  "id": "<usual hash>",
  "pubkey": randomPublicKey,
  "created_at": randomTimeUpTo2DaysInThePast(), 
  "kind": 1059, // gift wrap
  "tags": [
    ["p", receiverPublicKey, "<relay-url>"] // receiver
  ],
  "content": nip44Encrypt(
    {
      "id": "<usual hash>",
      "pubkey": senderPublicKey,
      "created_at": randomTimeUpTo2DaysInThePast(), 
      "kind": 13, // seal
      "tags": [], // no tags
      "content": nip44Encrypt(unsignedKind14, senderPrivateKey, receiverPublicKey),
      "sig": "<signed by senderPrivateKey>"
    },
    randomPrivateKey, receiverPublicKey
  ),
  "sig": "<signed by randomPrivateKey>"
}
```

The encryption algorithm MUST use the latest version of [NIP-44](44.md). 

Clients MUST verify if pubkey of the `kind:13` is the same pubkey on the `kind:14`, otherwise any sender can impersonate others by simply changing the pubkey on `kind:14`.

Clients SHOULD randomize `created_at` in up to two days in the past in both the seal and the wrap to make sure grouping by `created_at` doesn't reveal the group's metadata. 

The gift wrap's `p`-tag can be the receiver's main pubkey or an alias key created to receive DMs without exposing the receiver's identity.

> Clients SHOULD only broadcast giftwrap events to the private `inbox` relays of each recipient's [NIP-65](65.md), falling back to `read` relays.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clients SHOULD only broadcast giftwrap events to the private `inbox` relays of each recipient's [kind 10005](65.md).
```

> Clients MUST only broadcast giftwrap events to the private `inbox` relays of each recipient's [kind 10005](65.md) and to their own `outbox` relays.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clients MUST only broadcast giftwrap events to the private `inbox` relays of each recipient's [kind 10050](65.md) and to their own `outbox` relays.
```

Reviewer: I am stupid.

> Clients SHOULD only broadcast giftwrap events to the `read` relays of each recipient's [NIP-65](65.md).

Reviewer: This is a fatal flaw and should be changed.

I've talked about this many times with @vitorpamplona and @staab and others, and everybody always agrees we should use some other relay list, but this is still in the NIP and you're still using it? What is going on?

Author: Hum.. we never talked about nip 65 being a flaw at all. So, I am not sure what you mean. Regardless, this NIP is working well with the read relays of nip 65.

Reviewer: No, we talked about allowing users to specify a restricted set of (possibly just one even) relays that are used only for receiving DMs and not anything else, and DM clients being able to fetch a users's entire DM set from that single relay which would be very private and efficient.

Author: Sure! I just added the language to follow NIP-65 directions, whatever they are.

NIP-17
======

Private Direct Messages and Group DMs
-------------------------------------

`draft` `optional`

> This NIP defines an encrypted direct messaging scheme for 2+ participants using [NIP-44](44.md) encryption and [NIP-59](59.md) seals and gift wraps. 

Reviewer 2: I have not ready all 249 comments on this PR, but I see group size being discussed a lot. I just wanted to add my vote that we specify an upper limit on group size in this NIP, and create a separate NIP for larger encrypted groups. The upper limit will have to be somewhat arbitrary but it will be something around which apps can standardize their UI. I don't want every app to have a different limit on group size and I don't want every app to have _no_ limit on group size because both of those will create bad experiences for the user.

For large groups the expectation of privacy decreases and developer implementation difficulty increases. A large encrypted group will likely want better performance characteristics at the cost of privacy. This NIP strikes a nice balance between simplicity and privacy for small groups.

```suggestion
This NIP defines an encrypted direct messaging scheme for 2-16 participants using [NIP-44](44.md) encryption and [NIP-59](59.md) seals and gift wraps. 
```

In secure scuttlebutt the original group DM spec only supported 8 participants, and it was fine for like 80% of use cases. I think doubling that to 16 will cover like 90% of real world use cases for group DMs, so that's my arbitrary, anecdotal suggestion here.

Author: I don't know if we need to specify it on the spec. It's hard enough to sign, encrypt, download DM relays and publish to each recipient's relays separately that this alone might serve as a better blocker against big groups than anything else.

Author: Ok, I made a few changes to demphasize Groups from this NIP.

    },
    randomPrivateKey, receiverPublicKey
  ),
  "sig": "<signed by randomPrivateKey>"
}
```

The encryption algorithm MUST use the latest version of [NIP-44](44.md). 

Clients MUST verify if pubkey of the `kind:13` is the same pubkey on the `kind:14`, otherwise any sender can impersonate others by simply changing the pubkey on `kind:14`.

Clients SHOULD randomize `created_at` in up to two days in the past in both the seal and the wrap to make sure grouping by `created_at` doesn't reveal the group's metadata. 

The gift wrap's `p`-tag can be the receiver's main pubkey or an alias key created to receive DMs without exposing the receiver's identity.

Clients CAN offer disappearing messages to their own users by not creating a GiftWrap to the sender's public key or by setting an `expiration` tag in the gift wrap of each receiver.   

## Publishing 

Kind `10050` indicates the user's preferred relays to receive DMs. The event MUST include a list of `relay` tags with relay URIs.

```js
{
  "kind": 10050,
  "tags": [
    ["relay", "wss://inbox.nostr.wine"],
    ["relay", "wss://myrelay.nostr1.com"],
  ],
  "content": "",
  //...other fields
}
```

> Clients SHOULD publish kind `14` events to the `10050`-listed relays, falling back to `read` relays of [NIP-65](65.md) if `kind:10050` is not available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clients MUST publish kind `14` events to the `10050`-listed relays, refusing to send them if that is not available.
```

Author: I am torn on this. It forces DM clients to only work with each other. 

But it also forces the creation of 10050 events by every DM client. It forces the issue that these clients MUST help the use manage a 10050, instead of just half implementing it and using NIP-65 lists or kind3.

Reviewer 3: I don't comprehend the reason for specific per-NIP relay lists. Why doesn't a general "this relay is where the user accepts private events" work? Do different DM specs really have different requirements for the relays? I haven't heard of any. Are we just extending a general principle of complete separateness so as to avoid compatibility issues?

Author: @mikedilger 2 separate concerns: 

1. The more I think about this, the more I see this need to define relay addresses per NIP. There are things like Public Chats (NIP-26), for instance where NIP-65 should be ignored and the relay to be used is the one what was setup in the head-event's metadata. A similar thing happens for @staab's private communities. Clients should follow the community relay, not the user's personal relay. Medical Data, for instance, might have a relay marker to make sure the relay is HIPAA compliant (US-only). So, more private stuff might need additional relay information. This makes relay categories in NIP-65 not only difficult to predict but it might grow the list significantly. 

2. On the other way, we do have relays today that can be used to receive any private event, like `inbox.nostr.wine`. That shouldn't be just for the DMs in this particular PR.

Reviewer 3: All those things you mention in (1) don't conflict. They can all have their own way of choosing relays. It sounds like they already do. NIP-65 is only for when a case can be generalized. And it seems to me it would still be useful to have a generalized "private event" relay, even if none of the cases you list can utilize it.

If this NIP-17 can't utilize it either, I'm not understanding why not. If it turns out there is no general case, that all private event related NIPs need their own special thing, then you win and I lose and I'll bow out. It just seems to me that I will always be choosing the same relays for all these cases, relays that honor not sending private events to anybody but me, and allowing me to delete them.

Author: Actually, I agree with you, @mikedilger, that we can generalize the DM version to the private **event** from your NIP-65 change. It fits. 

Over there, I would change the description from `Direct Message` to simply `Private Inbox` and use the letter `p`. Clients should expect that Private Inbox relays accept any incoming event that tags one of their protected users. Only that user can download the event after AUTH. 

@staab @fiatjaf what do you say? Do we really need something specific just for DMs?

Reviewer: I was writing a big argument on why specific is better than generic, but I deleted it. I think it's just think it's a good rule of thumb because specific always be made generic later, but not the opposite. What if we come up with a new use case that doesn't fit in the "generic private relay" category?

I don't know. The argument is not very strong. Whatever you decide is fine by me.

Reviewer 4: I agree with fiatjaf, we might as well start with this NIP and expand it if needed. I do think the way Vitor articulated it, "Clients should expect that Private Inbox relays accept any incoming event that tags one of their protected users." shouldn't cause any problems. I also like including the recommendation that only recipients be able to download the events. But it could go in either place.

Author: Ok, let's keep this as is and after @mikedilger's PR gets merged, we can change it to revert to the Private Inbox relays in NIP-65 instead of the read relays.

> Clients SHOULD guide users to keep `kind:10050` lists small (2-4 relays) and SHOULD spread it to as many relays as viable. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clients SHOULD guide users to keep `kind:10050` lists small (1-3 relays) and SHOULD spread it to as many relays as viable. 
```

-----------------------

`draft` `optional`

This NIP defines an encrypted direct messaging scheme using [NIP-44](44.md) encryption and [NIP-59](59.md) seals and gift wraps. 

## Direct Message Kind

Kind `14` is a chat message. `p` tags identify one or more receivers of the message.

```js
{
  "id": "<usual hash>",
  "pubkey": "<sender-pubkey>",
  "created_at": now(),
  "kind": 14,
  "tags": [ 
    ["p", "<receiver-1-pubkey>", "<relay-url>"],
    ["p", "<receiver-2-pubkey>", "<relay-url>"],
    ["e", "<kind-14-id>", "<relay-url>", "reply"] // if this is a reply
    ["subject", "<conversation-title>"],
    ...
  ],
  "content": "<message-in-plain-text>",
}
```

`.content` MUST be plain text. Fields `id` and `created_at` are required. 

Tags that mention, quote and assemble threading structures MUST follow [NIP-10](10.md). 

Kind `14`s MUST never be signed. If it is signed, the message might leak to relays and become **fully public**.

## Chat Rooms

The set of `pubkey` + `p` tags defines a chat room. If a new `p` tag is added or a current one is removed, a new room is created with clean message history. 

Clients SHOULD render messages of the same room in a continuous thread. 

> An optional `subject` tag defines the current name/topic of the conversation. Any member can change the topic by simply submitting a new `subject` to an existing `pubkey` + `p`-tags room. There is no need to send `subject` in every message. The newest `subject` in the thread is the subject of the conversation. 

Reviewer 5: I just wanted to call this out because I actually do not know if it is reasonable or not. This restricts one chat room per unique set of pubkeys. That means they can't have different "rooms" for different subjects. Everything else in this section mentioned before this paragraph seems fine to me, though.

Author: Yep. It's mostly to keep it simple. there is no way to consistently use subject to define rooms ( missing events and posts in the past can mess It up). So we thought about following what Slack does and make the group about the people, not the topic.

## Encrypting

Following [NIP-59](59.md), the **unsigned** `kind:14` chat message must be sealed (`kind:13`) and then gift-wrapped (`kind:1059`) to each receiver and the sender individually.

```js
{
  "id": "<usual hash>",
  "pubkey": randomPublicKey,
  "created_at": randomTimeUpTo2DaysInThePast(), 
  "kind": 1059, // gift wrap
  "tags": [
    ["p", receiverPublicKey, "<relay-url>"] // receiver
  ],
  "content": nip44Encrypt(
    {
      "id": "<usual hash>",
      "pubkey": senderPublicKey,
      "created_at": randomTimeUpTo2DaysInThePast(), 
      "kind": 13, // seal
      "tags": [], // no tags
      "content": nip44Encrypt(unsignedKind14, senderPrivateKey, receiverPublicKey),
      "sig": "<signed by senderPrivateKey>"
    },
    randomPrivateKey, receiverPublicKey
  ),
  "sig": "<signed by randomPrivateKey>"
}
```

The encryption algorithm MUST use the latest version of [NIP-44](44.md). 

Clients MUST verify if pubkey of the `kind:13` is the same pubkey on the `kind:14`, otherwise any sender can impersonate others by simply changing the pubkey on `kind:14`.

> Clients SHOULD randomize `created_at` in up to two days in the past in both the seal and the gift wrap to make sure grouping by `created_at` doesn't reveal any metadata. 

Reviewer 5: Won't some clients miss the gift wrapped event if `created_at` is up to two days in the past? Some clients may use `created_at` set to `now` as a cursor to avoid fetching old events. Or do clients just need know that they need to fetch up to two days in the past for the gift wrap kind 1059?

Author: Yep, always fetch 2 days prior to the last fetch. Hopefully we get some Sync capabilities in the future.

NIP-17
======

Private Direct Messages and Group DMs
-------------------------------------

`draft` `optional`

This NIP establishes an encrypted direct messaging scheme for 2+ participants with the following privacy and security guarantees: 

1. **Superior Encryption**: Messages are encrypted using [NIP-44](44.md) to each participant's public key individually.
2. **No Metadata Leak**: Participant identities, each message's real date and time, event kinds, and other event tags are all hidden from the public
3. **Onion Layers**: Senders and receivers cannot be linked with public information alone ([NIP-59](59.md)).
4. **Trust-minimized**: Participants cannot expose verifiable details of your message, including the metadata, without reducing the security of their main private key
5. **No Identifiers**: There is no central queue, channel or otherwise converging identifier to correlate and count all messages in the same group. 
6. **No Moderation**: There are no group admins: no invitations or bans.

> 7. **No Shared Secrets**: There are no chatroom secrets that can leak or be mistakenly shared

Reviewer 3: The conversation key is still a long-lived secret between two people that could leak.

Author: Nice! I got rid of it for now. I still think something can be said about trust-minimization but frankly, this whole section will be deleted before we merge anyway...

NIP-17
======

Private Direct Messages and Small Group Chats
---------------------------------------------

`draft` `optional`

This NIP establishes an encrypted direct messaging scheme with the following privacy guarantees: 

> 1. **Superior Encryption**: Messages are encrypted with XChaCha ([NIP-44](44.md)) to each participant's public key individually.

Reviewer 3: Not XChaCha, just ChaCha.
